\section{Introduction}
The following chapter is concerned with the existing disconnect between the 
fields of travel demand modeling and causal inference. More specifically, the 
chapter is motivated by the current lack of use of methods and findings from 
the causal inference literature in travel demand modeling. The field of causal 
inference has had a significant boost in interest recently with a new 
direction of research based on the potential outcome framework and causal 
graphical models as put forward by Pearl et al. Specifically we can leverage 
the deconfounder work by Blei et al. to address unobsrved confounding in 
tranportation applications.




More often than not, the development of behavioral models in transportation, 
specifically transportation demand models, is driven by the need to evaluate 
the impact external interventions, in the form of alternative policies, on a 
certain outcome of interest. These questions that transportation demand models 
are built to answer are causal by definition: we are interested in how the 
system reacts to \textit{external} interventions. Yet, when those models are 
developed, there is very little consideration given to causality, and when 
causal concepts are accounted for, the process is done implicitly without a 
formal framework. 


The goal of this chapter is to formalize a framework for approaching 
transportation demand modeling problems from a causal perspective. We will 
draw heavily on the use of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), formalized by Judea 
pearl, as a means of representing the modeler's knowledge and assumptions 
about a given problem. The chapter will provide an overview of DAGs, the 
testable implications that come with one's causal representation, the main 
tests that one could do to falsify/justify a given causal graph, and then how 
to use a causal graph to estimate the causal relationships of interest. We 
will demonstrate the use of this framework through simulations, where we 
clearly show the benefits and implications of this approach as opposed to 
traditional approaches. 


The last part of this chapter deals with the more complicated issue of latent 
confounding, where one variable confounds two or more variables in the causal 
graph, but that variable is not observed (see graph 1). This type of 
confounding creates variations in the outcome variable that are not caused by 
the confounded variables but are correlated by it, which biases the estimated 
causal effects of those variables if nothing is done to account for the 
confounding. 





\blindtext[2]

This is an example citation \cite{brathwaite_2018_causal}
